---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: "Illustrating my Software Engineering Interests"
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2025-09-03
published: true
labels:
  - Software Engineering
  - Interests
---

Over the past half a decade, I’ve looked at JavaScript and thought that it was some magical and extremely complex language that only a few people were able to understand and utilize. This led me to stray away from it for a long time, and insteading focusing on languages like HTML, CSS, and eventually moving on to languages like Java, Python, C, and C++, without ever realizing the potential usefulness of JavaScript. After taking a look around at all of the new applications and websites being created, I noticed how much of them were being built on JavaScript and any JavaScript related tools and languages (e.g. TypeScript). This led me to inquire a bit more about the inner workings of JavaScript and TypeScript, a superset of JavaScript that allows you to have type-strictness. Ever since then, I’ve been interested in utilizing JavaScript and TypeScript to build interactive applications, and to test the limits of what JavaScript can do.
Speaking of limits, with the advent of AI, the limits of what we could do without having any prior knowledge within a given field have been constantly broken with each new AI model coming out. With the world moving closer and closer to integrating AI in our everyday lives, it’s become a desire of mine to learn more about how they work and how AI is evolving each day. Therefore, I’ve become quite curious about large language models and machine learning. A large language model is an advanced artificial intelligence system that is trained on massive amounts of text data to understand, process, and generate human language, likely applying machine learning, which is where computer systems learn from data to identify patterns and make predictions or decisions without explicit programming. In the near future, I feel that learning all that I can about LLMs and Machine Learning will help me navigate the future of the technology industry and the field of computer science.
Quoting Steve Jobs, “We used to dream about this stuff. Now, we get to build it. It’s pretty neat.” Steve Jobs said this back in June 2004 at the Apple Worldwide Developers Conference, which showcased new software and technologies. Although this next and final (for now) interest of mine isn’t creating new technologies (not yet at least, with my current knowledge and background), it does revolve around building new things. For the past few years now, I’ve been actively participating in and learning about cybersecurity and networking, and how the two are intertwined. Having had experience with large enterprise networks, and currently gaining experience in cybersecurity, I’ve become captivated by the idea of developing software solutions to help protect network systems and data from threats. With the world only delving deeper into the fields of technology and cybersecurity, I feel that this is something that will never disappear, and of much importance to learn about and explore.
Although I’ve illustrated these three interests, there are plenty more that I haven’t introduced yet. However, that is maybe for another day, as these interests are my main priority to learn, given the rapidly changing state of technology today, which focuses a lot on what I just mentioned. Hopefully once I master (or at least know a bit more about) these topics, then I will come back and illustrate more of the things that I would like to explore, but for now, these are the interests that I plan to pursue in the near future.
