---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: "Analyzing My Experience With AI"
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2025-12-16
published: True
labels:
  - AI
  - ChatGPT
  - GitHub Co-Pilot
  - ICS 314
  - Software Engineering
---

## An Introduction to AI

Over the past few years, artificial intelligence (A.I. or AI) has seen a skyrocket in usage and popularity as it’s become more and more capable of doing tasks similar to those of professionals. Students in high schools and colleges around the world have used AI to aid them, having AI explain hard topics or problems to them, help them with their thought processes, and even just do their work for them (which is increasingly being seen with essays like this one). There are an increasing number of AI products emerging, including but not limited to: Claude, Gemini, Co-Pilot, and ChatGPT, among many others. Most classes would shy away from having you use AI, however, throughout the duration of this ICS 314 course, we’ve been encouraged to make great use of AI and learn how to properly use it for software development. This means using prompt engineering (by specifying things for the AI’s response to meet) to generate a more accurate response. By specifying things, I mean drawing upon the parameters of the assignment/task; what specific coding standards I need to meet (ESLint), what specific output I am looking for (returning a particular value, or maybe updating a particular item in a database), and what specific things I should utilize to get my desired output (using a for loop instead of a while loop, creating an auxiliary function, etc.). To aid me in this course, I specifically made use of GitHub’s Co-Pilot in addition to ChatGPT (though I used this considerably less than Co-Pilot).

## My Usage of AI Throughout the Class

#### Experience WODs

In order to familiarize the students with the various types of code used in software engineering (html, css, react-bootstrap, javascript, typescript, among others), there were many experience workouts of the day (WODs) which had us practice building functions, sections of pages, and eventually full pages utilizing what we’ve learned from the material. These WODs had completion time cutoffs (i.e. After 45 minutes you could be considered to not have completed the WOD), but the timing was up to the student and they could do the WOD as many times as they wanted until they got a good completion time. Because of this, I avoided using AI for these particular assignments, since I could just keep redoing the assignment until I got it right, and there was no real punishment for spending lots of time on the assignment. However, for the experiences with lots of components like Digits, which had us updating a website built on Nextjs, I had sometimes used Co-Pilot’s code completion feature to save me time as long as I knew how to do the code that was being auto-completed for me.

#### In-Class Practice WODs

In addition to experience WODs, there were also in-class practice WODs, which were assigned in the first class of the week. They were the same as the experience WODs, but came without the ability to redo the WOD (although you could technically do the WOD again, you couldn’t turn it in again). This meant an increase in pressure, since once the timer was up, whatever you completed was your score for that assignment. With the increase in pressure, it was important to save time by any means necessary and focus on the main things. This is why for these particular WODs, I used AI to help me with the more time-consuming tasks like generating test cases. This would be done by asking a prompt like, “generate several test cases for this code which demonstrate that the function correctly supplies an output of x, y, and z.” In addition, if I was running low on time, I would use the AI for error correction, making sure that my final product had no major errors.

#### In-Class WODs

After the in-class practice WODs were completed, the following class would have an actual WOD, which meant that they held more weight in the gradebook and were also tested more rigorously than the practice WODs, meaning that the code had to be almost perfect. This, in addition to the inability to redo the WOD, meant even more pressure when compared to the practice WODs and experience WODs. Therefore, to account for this, in addition to having AI create test cases and check errors to save time, I would sometimes have AI create the skeleton of adjacent functions if I was running out of time. An example of this would be the CO2 WOD, which had us find the first unrecoverable year and month where co2 levels surpassed the safe limit, in addition to counting the number of months where the co2 levels went below the safe limit after exceeding it. Because I had spent so much time working on finding the first unrecoverable year and month where the co2 levels surpassed the safe limit, I did not have enough time to finish the second function to find the number of months where the co2 levels went below the safe limit after surpassing it. Therefore, I had asked Co-Pilot to “create the skeleton of a function that used the filter method and the previous function to determine the number of months where the co2 levels went below the unrecoverable level.” This allowed me to save time and then fill in whatever was missing from the output, then work on creating test cases and checking errors before time ran out.

#### Essays

Over the course of a few months, there have been many essays in which I was required to write about various aspects of software engineering, and my experiences with this course. However, there was never a point in which I used AI to write or aid in writing any of the content, since it would not end up being meaningful, having not come fully from my own self. With that in mind, I still did use AI in very rare capacities, such as generating title ideas, as it was not always easy to come up with essay names and section titles.

#### The Final Project

Working on the final project opened me up to a lot of AI usage. Working with a group meant a lot of conflicting code was being written into the repository, and it is not easy to comb through all of the changed files to figure out what was working differently than before. Therefore, I often used AI to explain code or find code for me, asking prompts like “could you explain what this function is doing,” and “where is the function that uses this variable located.” This made it much easier to understand the frequent changes and look for specific pages that needed changing. I also used AI when trying to figure out new ways to approach a problem. For example, when trying to figure out a way to display the list of all of the possible ICS courses that users could say they were currently taking, I had created a default list of all of the courses in the settings.development.json file and asked Co-Pilot something along the lines of, “how could I go using this default list and map it to a list of checkboxes that the user can select from when creating and/or editing their user profile.” This then showed me the option of creating a route to create the process, which I ended up following. Sometimes, I came across large amounts of errors in the code from someone forgetting to check their code, me creating multiple ESLint errors, or me taking the wrong approach to a problem. When this happened, I sometimes asked AI to help me, especially when looking at my teammates’ code, as I didn’t write it which would take too long to understand, time that is not available on a short deadline. This would solve the errors and allow me to focus on the task at hand.

#### Learning New Concepts

Despite my usage of AI to aid in work, I don’t usually use AI to aid me in learning new concepts. Since the ICS 314 course website provided lots of materials, there was not really any real need to go to AI to try to understand the concepts, which rendered AI not useful in these cases. Rare cases in which this would not be the case would be looking for short summaries of topics in order to help me remember something.

#### Answering Questions in Class or on Discord

Given the amount of material to learn and new tools to install and use in class (e.g. VSCode, Postgresql, Nextjs, Vercel, etc.), there was no shortage of questions to be asked and answered regarding issues that arose when using such tools. However, despite this, by the time I was around to answer a question, there was already another answer which satisfied the student’s question, allowing me to refrain from answering the question and using any sort of AI to aid in my answer. In class, the situation was different but the result of not using much AI was similar. The professor generally allotted us a minute or two to answer his question through any means (like asking AI), however because it was much faster to look up the topic on a search engine than entering in a prompt into an AI, I generally took the former route. Though with the introduction of AI into Google’s search engine, I guess you could consider that a form of AI usage as well, as the AI response is generally what is noticed first before any website.

#### Asking or Answering Smart-Questions

Similar to the section above, I did not end up using AI to answer smart-questions in class or on online class chats, since the questions were generally answered before I got to them. However, I did use AI to ask smart-questions. These questions weren’t geared towards another human however, but used to generate a more specific prompt to aid in my development of a particular task or assignment. This would be something like “using this resource, help me determine the parameters needed to implement this item.” I could then use the response to generate a better prompt.

#### Coding Examples

Prior to the final project, I did not really use AI to write me coding examples, as I had primarily used it for fixing code, writing test cases, and writing skeletons of functions. However, as the requirements increased for the final project and I ventured further into the territory of the unknown in terms of how to implement certain features, I required more documentation and examples in order to figure out where to go next. An example of this during the project was when I was unsure about the correctness of my implementation of a many to many model for CourseToUsers, and asked Co-Pilot for examples of how to implement and use the model. This made it much easier for me to figure out where I went wrong and fix or improve my implementation (though the AI was not always necessarily right).

#### Explaining Code

As stated in the Final Project section, I made great use of AI’s ability to explain code. Having the AI scan the code and give me an overview of what each section of code did was much more efficient than slowly reading through the code myself, though if I was working on my own code, then there was no real need to explain code, and this was more useful for group projects.

#### Writing Code

Like the Explaining Code section, I made great use of AI’s ability to write code during the final project. This was done in particular to find new ways to approach problems, as stated with my course issue. In addition, I’ve also used it to create skeletons and test cases for code that I didn’t necessarily have time to fully complete alone, such as the co2 WOD example from the In-Class WODs section.

#### Documenting Code

Throughout the semester, I used AI to document my code quite often. The ability for AI to quickly scan through code makes it very efficient when it comes to writing documentation. I generally asked simple prompts like “please generate comments detailing how these sections of code work,” since there was not really any real need for specific parameters. I had ultimately utilized this throughout my WODs to ensure that those who were analyzing and testing my code knew exactly what each part did in regards to the whole.

#### Quality Assurance

When working on the final project, there was bound to be missed ESLint errors and other errors from conflicting code. This occurred multiple times, since I sometimes had to manually merge my changes with a group member’s changes to the main repository. When this happened, I made great use of AI to save me time, asking prompts like “please check for any ESLint errors and resolve them to the best of your ability,” and “what is wrong with this piece of code (insert the error given here) and how can I fix this.”  I generally used the latter prompt than the former, given that I could run npm run lint –fix to fix smaller items (though not big ESLint errors, which were generally saved for the AI to tackle if they were not related to my code). By having AI solve these issues I could save time and make sure that I was delivering an error-free product (in this case, the Study Buddy website).

## Impact of AI on my own Intelligence

After using AI throughout the semester to aid in my experience with this course, I’ve realized that it is not entirely beneficial, but also not entirely detrimental to my learning. Despite sometimes having to tackle larger problems for me on things like the final project, I was able to learn what questions to ask, figure out what I was looking for out of the particular task/assignment, and learn the parameters of the problem before prompting the AI for help. These skills will help me to better understand and problem solve when dealing with any future project or problem, even those not related to software engineering. In regards to comprehension and skill development, AI’s usefulness landed somewhere in the middle. It was good for learning new ways to tackle a problem (as stated with examples in the Final Projects section), but if used in excess it would take away from the cementing of my knowledge of the course content (in this case, Typescript in particular), though with the added perk of saving time for other things. After saying all of that, I’ve come to the conclusion that I both gained and potentially lost out from using AI. I learned how to ask questions, but may have been more solid in my foundation of the tools used for this course if I used less AI (though I did not use AI to the extreme, I would still have liked to use it less if I were to go back). On the bright side, this did allow me to understand the idea of use cases, as having a good and detailed prompt is like having a strong use case which covers all aspects of a given thing.

## Applications of AI Outside of College

AI is not only used purely for web development. There have been instances where I’ve used AI to help speed up the development process of specific activities that I was working on outside of class. An example of this is when I used AI to help speed up my development of a PowerShell form that generated me a random password, as well as added/modified users and played with other system information. AI is also ever increasing in usage and integration with websites as well, as many of the recent Hawaii Annual Coding Challenge prompts were focused on integrating websites with some form of AI, whether it be a chatbot or otherwise. AI is a great tool when it comes to improving the efficiency and work capacity of software engineers (as long as they are knowledgeable in what they specialize in without the usage of AI).

## Challenges and Limitations to AI Usage

After spending so much time fiddling with AI and seeing what it is capable of and what it is not, I’ve discovered that there are a few main problems that make AI unreliable when used incorrectly. The first problem is that since AI is drawing upon existing knowledge to give you your answer, the response it might give you could be suitable for something else, but not for your particular assignment. The second problem is that AI can sometimes produce really incorrect code if you do not specify exactly what you want and what your desired output is. This can become a disaster in the hands of a person who does not know what they want with their code, as the AI will keep making changes that the user wants and by the time the user has what they wanted, the code used is non-standard and all over the place as a result of the multiple changes made along the way. The last main problem I would like to discuss is the bias of AI to agree with your personal biases and hallucinate. This can end poorly if you just blindly follow what your AI says and don’t check it, because it could lead you to make devastating changes to a project which may be irreversible depending on how it is set up.
	
## Traditional Teaching Methods vs AI-Enhanced Approaches for Software Engineering Education

Now that AI has come and is a large part of education today, it will not be leaving anytime soon. Therefore, it is important to figure out what is good about AI-integrated learning when compared to traditional methods. I believe that the first traditional method of learning how to code by hand without AI use is important, as it helps you to develop the foundation of how to code and how to generate good standard code on your own, so when you use AI, you can tell apart useful code from bad code. When you use AI, your foundation is not as solid, leaving you with knowledge gaps and a lack of confidence in your abilities, which leads to further AI use and more degradation of your foundation, which is why for practical skill development, traditional is the way to go. However for things like retention of knowledge and engagement, the use of AI should be totally fine. AI is great at simplifying information and making it easier to understand. By using AI, one can soak up material that may have taken 10 or so boring slideshows to cover, saving time and allowing for more time to cement that newly absorbed information. All in all, each form of teaching has its own areas where it excels and where it underperforms, so there is no true winner.

## AI’s Future Role in Software Engineering Education

At its current state, software engineering and AI do not share the best relationship. AI is just being used to mindlessly generate code without considering the core principals of software engineering (things like use cases, entity-relationships, design patterns, and more). In order to fix this and improve the quality of education, one must take a step back first. The core principals should be covered first, like learning how to properly design a use case, set goals, learn the various types of design patterns and when they are used, and other important fundamentals. Then once those are covered can one learn how to implement those fundamentals with code. First without AI, then gradually allowing AI usage as the students become more familiar with the fundamentals. Then by this point they should hopefully be able to responsibly ask AI for help by covering all parameters needed and specifying what they want as much as possible to get the most accurate answer. By following this method, students may hopefully be able to learn more and not entirely rely on AI without thinking for themselves.

## Conclusion

Overall, I think the use of AI in this course was useful and had some drawbacks. AI is a great tool when it comes to speeding up code creation for time-consuming tasks, like commenting code and creating test cases, but can become a bad crutch when used for everything, even including the main content of an assignment. When asked correct questions that tackle all parameters and everything the user wants, AI can provide very accurate answers, but when asked questions with extreme vagueness and a lack of direction, AI can provide answers that seem utterly useless. Therefore it is of utmost importance to understand your problem and write it out before trying to blindly tackle it. The quality of your AI response depends on it. AI is also great for aid in one’s learning by providing useful information, but shouldn’t be used to do practice problems and assignments for things that are considered to be for the student and for them to use to cement their own learned information.
With the mixed reputation of AI, I believe that the best way to move forward with this is to first learn without AI, then incorporate it when the students are familiar with the course material. Only by mastering the material can they know how to properly use AI to aid them, otherwise they’ll just be hurting themselves. AI is a great help, but can become a great disaster when used without one’s knowledge to supplement the AI. AI may have intelligence in its name, but they are not sentient beings (at this point in time), so there still needs to be a human brain behind them in order to make any meaningful impact.
