---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: "Communication Is Key, Don’t Question It"
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2025-09-11
published: true
labels:
  - Questions
  - Answers
  - StackOverflow
---

No one likes it when they have a task or assignment to do, and they get stuck for hours trying to figure out one tiny section of the greater whole. That is why over time, there have been many forums, help desks, and manuals that were created specifically for helping users online with their various needs. This is something that has been done for a long time. Before the dawn of computers, you had manuals for different products and call centers where you could ask questions about your specific product. Going into the digital age, we’ve shifted this to various online platforms where you can ask for help.

## Hailing for Help

When asking for help, like everything else, that requires some sort of interaction between people, which means that communication is key. You must be able to get your question across with specificity and politeness in a way that invites others to want to help you out, and allows them to figure out your problem without coming to various assumptions about what you are trying to accomplish and what you are using to accomplish your goals. If you do not have good communication, it can slow down the time between your question and a response, you may not get the answer or answers that you want, and you may not even get an answer. Quoting Tony Robbins, “The way we communicate with others and ourselves ultimately determines our quality of life”<a href="https://graciousquotes.com/communication/">[2]</a>. In this case, the way you communicate determines the quality of the response(s).

## Why Software Engineers Should Craft Their Questions Carefully

For software engineers, when creating a product, the product has to be specifically tailored to what they are being applied to. That means that many times you are creating code that can’t just be grabbed from some introductory learning website, and coming across problems will likely require some extensive understanding of what you are trying to do, what error you are facing, and how your code currently functions. If you decide to ask someone for help, that means that they will also have to have some sort of understanding of what you are trying to do, your error(s), and how your code functions in order to give some sort of response. That is why smart questions are important. Being specific allows you to aid your potential responders in understanding what you are trying to accomplish and how your current approach to the problem is, so that they can use their knowledge and experience to diagnose the problem’s specific solution, and not just give generic pointers that don’t really help you much. Being specific also saves your responders the time of understanding what you are trying to do, which is crucial, especially when you are on a deadline and trying to complete a project, or resolve an error in a system. After all, time is precious, and spending more of your time and your responders’ time than is necessary is not ideal. To illustrate my points, let's examine what a potentially smart question would be, and what a potentially not so smart question would be. For the two following questions, we will be basing our examination on Eric Raymond and Rick Moen’s How To Ask Questions The Smart Way<a href="http://www.catb.org/esr/faqs/smart-questions.html">[3]</a>, where a smart question will follow most or all of the principles stated within the book, while a not-so-smart question will not follow such principles.

## Why Doesn’t My Question Work?

First, we’ll start off with a question that wouldn’t likely get you the answer(s) that you are looking for. This specific question was found in StackOverflow on the topic of php, aptly named “Why my code doesnt works”<a href="https://stackoverflow.com/questions/18068860/why-my-code-doesnt-works">[4]</a>. This particular user asks netizens why their if-statement returns false if it is not working, then asks what their logical mistake was and how they may fix the code so that it will work. The user then provides a long set of code with only one comment in the code that states, “checks if both of results”, which doesn’t help much with understanding what the code does. This question in particular would not be considered a great question to ask because it violates much of the principles outlined by Raymond and Moen. The question is not precise or very informative about what the problem is, merely stating that the if-statement is not working and that it is returning false. In addition, the question is also not entirely clear and written with correct grammar (although it is understandable, since the user is likely speaking English as their second language, given that the code is written in another language in some parts). Most importantly, although the user states what type of response they want to some extent (code with fixes), they are not explicit with how they ask the question, just asking how they may fix the code, without explaining much about what the code even does, making it harder for others to understand what the code does to the point where they can provide a helpful answer. Due to the lack of quality in the question, the responses aren’t extremely informative at first. One user states that the question is impossible to answer, then asks for the structure of the database, while another user just tells the original poster to debug the code. After giving the database structure, the poster received an answer, though it provided many surface level fixes that the poster could try to fix their code, with a snippet of code that they could use to test their fixes. None of these answers really gave the poster what they wanted, and the user did not end up responding letting the other users know if their answers were helpful or not, or if their issue was resolved.

## Quality Questions Create Quality Responses

Moving forward, let’s take a look at a question that would almost always get you the answer(s) that you are looking for. This specific question was also found in StackOverflow, named “Nodejs backend endpoint not hitting consistently. Using nginx, ec2”<a href="https://stackoverflow.com/questions/79760525/nodejs-backend-endpoint-not-hitting-consistently-using-nginx-ec2">[1]</a>. This particular user is asking netizens for the reason why their backend endpoint/route called /allRoom is not being hit when trying to create a room. Before going into the nitty gritty of this question, it should be stated that this question is considered a smart question because it: is precise and informative about the problem, it describes the problem’s symptoms (with images of outputs), and the question is explicit (it specifically asks why these particular errors are occurring). In the beginning of the question, the user specifically lets everyone know what they are using: Nginx for load balancing, hosting on AWS, and a backend written in Node.js. Throughout the question, the user provides snippets of code that are used to help understand the problem, outputs of code to help understand what is going wrong and where, as well as error status codes (200) from the frontend. The user also explicitly states what should be happening and what is currently happening (players are bypassing a check that ensures that a room exists, and two administrators are ending up in the same room, which is not intended). This specificity within the question, with a clear understanding of what is desired and what is currently possessed, allowed users to quickly respond, giving an answer only a few hours after the question was posted. The first user who responded was able to clearly identify a problem with NGINX, and gave updated code to add to the poster’s join.jsx file and their NGINX config log. The poster was promptly able to fix their problem and let the other users know that their problem was resolved.

## Hopefully Intelligent Takeaways

After taking a look at some smart and not-so-smart questions online, it is imperative that you are clear with what you are trying to do, where you are trying to go, and where you are currently stuck and what is causing that stuckness. Being clear seems to be the deciding factor in whether or not your question is answered. Looking back at the not-so-smart question, you could see that because the poster was not clear with what their exact problem was and the fix that they were looking for, they got a response that wasn’t entirely specific and may or may not have been able to resolve the problem that they were facing. However, when looking back at the smart question, you could see that because the poster was clear with their exact problem, where they were experiencing the problem, how they were experiencing the problem, and what the intended outcome was supposed to be, the poster got a specific response that was able to resolve the problem that they were facing. So, if you didn’t get anything out of this but want the key takeaways, just remember to know what your intended outcome is, where your current problem is happening and what the problem is when compared to your intended outcome, and what you want others to do to help you with your problem.

## References

[1] Ankit, & Sahr, B. (2025, September 10). Nodejs backend endpoint not hitting consistently. using Nginx, EC2. Stack Overflow. https://stackoverflow.com/questions/79760525/nodejs-backend-endpoint-not-hitting-consistently-using-nginx-ec2 

[2] Gracious Quotes. (2023, November 30). 37 effective communication quotes (respect). https://graciousquotes.com/communication/ 

[3] Raymond, E. S., & Moen, R. (2014, May 21). How to ask questions the smart way. http://www.catb.org/. http://www.catb.org/esr/faqs/smart-questions.html 

[4] Yoni, matt3141, & Geeky Guy. (2013, August 5). Why my code doesnt works. Stack Overflow. https://stackoverflow.com/questions/18068860/why-my-code-doesnt-works
